# Winning Arguments

## How to use this text

You can use this text as a practical guide to winning arguments, to reasoning about any subject, to seeking the truth about any subject, and to misleading people about any subject.

The text is a philosophical study of language, reasoning, argumentation, and related topics, with the practical aim stated above. The same theories that explain how to win arguments on any subject also explain how to reason about any subject, how to seek the truth about any subject, and how to mislead people about any subject. The same knowledge can be used for any of these purposes, and it's up to the person who has it to use it responsibly.

The author advises the reader against the use of any techniques to deliberately mislead people, as the author believes misleading people almost invariably leads, in the long haul, to consequences more deplorable than what would have resulted if one told the truth.

The text contains exercises, which the author feels will be likely to further the reader's learning, and which the reader is encouraged to do when they feel they will further their learning. The greatest exercise, of course, is life, where you can fruitfully exercise the skills of reasoning, critical thinking, and argumentation you can learn in this text in almost any context of life.

This text is meant to be read from start to finish without skipping around. It is cumulative; each piece builds upon preceding pieces. In general you shouldn't expect to fully understand a part of the text unless you understand the text up to that point. 

For those who have not read much philosophy before, I apologize for the plodding and abstract nature of the text, which poses great challenges to reading comprehension. I would like to offer some words of advice on how to read the text. Start by reading it one sentence at a time, making sure you understand at least what each sentence is saying, before moving onto the next sentence. If you understand what's being said but not why it's being said, you can just plow forward and imagine it will eventually become clear. If there's a sentence or a section that's giving you too much difficulty, you can skip it. If you get totally lost and stop being able to follow what's being said, you can go back to the last point in the text up to which you're comfortable you've understood things, and re-read from there.

To those who are new to philosophy, I recommend patience with the speed of one's understanding if it proves to be a problem. Philosophical thoughts are usually developed by going over the same problems again and again over the course of years, and understanding philosophical writing often requires reading it multiple times and thinking about it over time.

In this text we will engage in an activity we call "conceptual analysis." Conceptual analysis is analysis of the meaning of words or concepts with the aim of clarifying their meaning and understanding it more deeply. In general, and in this text, conceptual analysis falls somewhere between the two poles of purely descriptive analysis, describing how various people have used a word or concept, and purely prescriptive analysis, defining a precise meaning for the term which the author uses and argues that readers should use. Descriptive conceptual analysis is useful for uncovering the many layers of meaning that are often present in everyday terms. Prescriptive conceptual analysis, used judiciously, is useful for establishing clear communication and laying linguistic foundations that can be built on. A gentle and careful blending of descriptive and prescriptive conceptual analysis provides, in my experience, a powerful and versatile ingredient for philosophical argumentation. This text is or aims to be, among other things, a study in the method of conceptual analysis, and a large proportion of the text is conceptual analysis.

## Introduction

Winning arguments is what we aim to show how to do in this text. We will show how this can be done by constructing winning arguments. As just illustrated, the phrase "winning arguments" has at least two important senses.

First, "winning arguments" can be interpreted to refer to an activity, the activity of winning arguments, where "argument" here is used in the sense of "debate."

Second, "winning arguments" can be interpreted as a noun phrase, where "argument" is used in the sense of "a series of statements designed to provide reasons to believe some conclusion(s)." In this interpretation of the phrase, "winning" is an adjective, presumably meaning something like "persuasive."

A great deal of importance has been introduced in the preceding three paragraphs, so let's unpack the ideas further.

The first item of importance is the distinction between two senses of the word "argument."

Arguments in the first sense of the word are debates. By "debates," I mean exchanges of communication where participants discuss with each other the merits and demerits of some claims that they are mutually interested in and believe themselves to disagree about.

Arguments in the second sense of the term are series of statements designed to provide reasons to believe some conclusion(s). Henceforth, in this text we will consistently use the term "argument" to refer to arguments in this second sense, and we will use the term "debate" in order to retire the first sense of the term "argument."

### Examples of arguments

Here is an example of an argument:

**(Question Science)** You shouldn't uncritically accept the conclusions of all scientific studies you come across. [Ioannidis (2005)](http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124) is a scientific study which claims that most published research findings are false. If you should uncritically accept the conclusions of all scientific studies you come across, then you should accept Ioannidis (2005). But if you uncritically accept Ioannidis (2005), then you accept that most scientific studies draw false conclusions. That means you shouldn't uncritically accept the conclusions of all scientific studies you come across, because if you do, you can expect to be adopting a lot of false beliefs.

Let's analyze this argument, which we will refer to as Question Science. Question Science seeks to prove that you should not uncritically accept the conclusions of all scientific studies you come across. It proceeds by assuming for the sake of argument the opposite of what it seeks to prove, and deriving an absurd result. It assumes for the sake of argument that we should uncritically accept the conclusions of all scientific studies we come across, and ends by deriving the absurd conclusion that you should do something which will lead to you adopting a lot of false beliefs.

Let's step through the argument. We begin with the assumption for the sake of argument that you should uncritically accept all scientific studies you come across. The next move is based on the observation that if somebody thinks that way, you can make them believe anything that's said in a published scientific paper. The next move is to point out a paper, Ioannidis (2005), which will make us believe, under our sake-of-argument assumption, that most scientific studies conclude things that are false. This tells us that the thing we assumed we should do will lead us to hold many false beliefs. With the further assumption that we should not uncritically accept information that's likely to be false, we can refute the statement that we started out by assuming. In other words we can conclude that we should not uncritically accept the conclusions of all scientific studies we come across.

Question Science is an example of a *reductio ad absurdum* argument. A *reductio ad absurdum* argument, in a strict sense, is one that proceeds by assuming the negation of its conclusion, and deriving a logical contradiction thereby. In a looser sense, a *reductio ad absurdum* argument can derive, instead of a logical contradiction, an absurd consequence that will probably be unacceptable to the audience of the argument, leading the audience to reject the assumption that leads to that consequence.

Question Science is a *reductio ad absurdum* argument in the looser sense. In the argument above, we first assume the view we wish to refute, and with a modest amount of information and background assumptions, we get to the conclusion that our assumption will likely lead us to accept many false things as true, something which makes most people want to back out of the assumption.

Question Science is an example of a winning argument. I expect the reader agrees: it is hard to disagree with the reasoning, or the conclusion. I haven't encountered anybody who finds this argument unpersuasive. One reason the argument is so strong is the simplicity and effectiveness of its structure, which is based on the *reductio ad absurdum* idea that is the basis of many good arguments stretching back to ancient times.

Let's round out this discussion with an example of an argument which is a *reductio ad absurdum* in the strict sense: that is, an argument which proceeds by assuming the opposite of that which it seeks to prove, and deriving a logical contradiction from that assumption. As our example, we will do an informal version of the classic proof, due to Euclid, that there are infinitely many prime numbers.

**(Infinitude of Primes)** Recall that a prime number is a positive whole number which is divisible only by itself and one. Suppose, towards reaching a contradiction, that there are finitely many prime numbers. Let x be the number resulting from multiplying together all the prime numbers and adding one. Since x is evidently larger than all prime numbers, x is not prime. The fact that x is not prime means, by definition, that x is divisible by at least one prime number. Pick a prime that x is divisible by, and call it p. We know that the remainder of dividing x by p is 0, since that's what it means for x to be divisible by p. However, we also know that the remainder of dividing p by x is 1, because of how we produced x. This is a contradiction, demonstrating that our original assumption was false, or in other words that there are infinitely many prime numbers.

Why is it true (at the second to last sentence of the argument) that the remainder of dividing p by x is 1? We produced x by multiplying together all the (finitely many) prime numbers and adding one. Therefore p goes into (x-1) evenly, i.e. the remainder of the division (x-1)/p is zero, and therefore the remainder of the division x/p is 1.

Infinitude of Primes is another example of a winning argument. Mathematical facts, like the fact that there are infinitely many prime numbers, are extraordinarily uncontroversial. As we will see later, this is because math is a game that has simple and essentially agreed upon rules. By describing math as a game, I do not mean to imply that math is not an activity of seeking truth. I don't mean to take any position in this text on whether or not math is an activity of seeking the truth. Nonetheless, it is clear that correct mathematical proofs are some of the best examples we have of winning arguments.

We've dug a bit into the concept of arguments, in the sense of series of statements designed to provide reasons to believe some conclusion(s). Let's now return to the distinction we made between debates and arguments.

### Arguments and debates

Debates almost always involve the participants making arguments. Can arguments occur anywhere except in the context of debates? 

One place where you can find arguments is in books, especially books about philosophical or political subjects. One can argue that an argument in a book is not in the context of any particular debate, because a book is an inanimate object that can exist in many copies in different places and times. Books are objects which are incapable of participating reciprocally in debates. You can arguably let a book make arguments to you by reading it. You can also respond to the book's arguments, mentally, in your journal, to other people, to the author, etc. But the book cannot respond to your responses to its arguments. The author might be able to, if they're still alive, but that's another issue. This is what I mean when I say that books cannot participate reciprocally in debates. For these and many other reasons, you might say that arguments in books do not necessarily occur in the context of any debate, or perhaps that they never do.

Nonetheless, you might argue that arguments in books usually do occur in the context of some debate or another. This idea is palatable if we accept, as examples of debates, ongoing public debates. An ongoing public debate on a question, roughly, is a situation where lots of people make arguments on and have debates on the question, across a significant slice of space and time, probably across a region or the world for years. If you accept ongoing public debates as examples of debates, then you will probably accept that most arguments in most books occur in the context of some debate.

A possible exception to this generalization is the (hypothetical) case where somebody writes a book which makes arguments on a topic nobody else has discussed, and then nobody reads the book. In this case, you could for the sake of uniformity say that the book occurs in the context of a debate involving one person, the author. However, this might be odd to say because there seems to be something inherently interactive, social, multi-personal about debates. I think most people are going to be inclined to say that the arguments in this book do not occur in the context of any debate.

The possibility of such an exception to the generalization that arguments in books occur in the context of some debate makes more sense when we consider the plausibility of the idea that an argument in a book can occur in the context of multiple debates. For example, a single book about climate change can be involved in the overall public debate on climate change, while simultaneously being involved in many particular interpersonal debates about climate change, each occurring between a specific group of people together in one location in physical space or cyberspace. It seems reasonable to talk in this way and to say that the book is involved in multiple debates on one subject. If the number of debates a book is involved in can vary in number, then it seems only natural that the number could in principle equal zero, though that probably isn't common in reality.

So far we've reached three generalizations about the relationship between arguments and debates:

* Arguments usually occur in the context of debates.
* Debates usually contain arguments.
* Arguments can, in principle, occur outside the context of debates.

In my estimation, all of these points are important. That arguments usually occur in the context of debates, and debates usually contain arguments, tells us that arguments and debates are importantly related to each other and we need to understand them together. That arguments can, in principle, occur outside the context of debates tells us that arguments can be understood independently from debates (though it doesn't tell us whether that's the most useful way to understand them). It's probably not the case, on the other hand, that debates can be understood independently from arguments, since skilled debates are almost always in essence exchanges of arguments.

We will take both of the available approaches to understanding arguments. One can understand arguments either within the context of debates, or independently from debates. We will do both. It's very helpful to study arguments in what we will call the *context-free perspective,* i.e. outside the context of debates. This perspective helps us focus in on arguments' intrinsic properties, and thereby understand arguments much better. However, the perspective is unbalanced if we don't also study arguments in the *contextful perspective*, i.e. in the context of debates as they occur in reality.

Hopefully that discussion of the relationships between debates and arguments has clarified for the reader the distinction between debates and arguments, as well as helping to clarify each concept individually.

Let's return to our original task of clarifying the meaning of the first three paragraphs of this text. So far we've clarified the meanings of two critical words, "debate" and "argument." Yet many words of nebulous, dubious, or unclear meaning remain. First and foremost, "winning," but also (with the evident nebulousness, dubiousness or unclarity depending in part on where and how deep you've traveled into philosophy) "true," "reason," "believe," "persuasive," and "statement." Let's analyze the meanings of these words.

## Winning, and games

What is winning? For starters, winning is most often something that happens to people in the context of games (chess, baseball, etc.).

Question: is winning something that ever happens to people *except* in the context of some game?

To make a start on what's going to be a highly roundabout answer to this question, let's consider the phrase "winning at life." Winning at life is a form of winning, at least on a surface inspection of the phrase. One can also hypothesize that "winning at life" is in some usages a phrase with its own particular meaning that doesn't decompose as winning in the context of life, in the same way that a "close shave" doesn't always refer to a shave that was close.

If winning at life is winning in the context of life, and winning only ever happens in the context of some game, then it follows that life is a game. So, then, is life a game? 

"Life is a game" is a truism, a common statement that people are liable to spout as a form of shallow wisdom, perhaps without much reflection on how true it really is. How true is the truism? To answer that, we need to ask, what does the truism mean? To answer that, we need to ask, what do the words in the truism mean? "Life" in the truism seems to refer to human life, and probably it's clear enough what we're referring to there. What about "game?" What is a game?

Let's try to make a start on this question by identifying some things that are games, and also some things that are not games, which fail to be games in ways that are interesting and tell us something about games. A lot of the judgment as to which is which is going to be subjective, but the judgments on particular cases aren't in the end the important thing, but rather what's important is the general picture of games that emerges from the analysis.

Popular and typical examples of games include soccer, chess, poker, dice, solitaire, World of Warcraft, and slot machines. Childrens' games include [peekaboo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peekaboo), [tag](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tag_(game)), [ring around the rosie](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring_a_Ring_o'_Roses), and two people sitting on the ground and rolling a ball back and forth between each other. Weird, unusual cases of games include [war games](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Military_exercise), the [Olympic Games](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Olympic_Games), [Roman gladiatorial combat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gladiator), TV game or reality shows such as [The Celebrity Apprentice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Celebrity_Apprentice), [Chopped](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chopped_(TV_series)#Format), and [Lost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lost_(game_show)), and abstract theoretical games like the [prisoner's dilemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prisoner's_dilemma) which are studied in [game theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_theory). There's a whole category of more analogical usages of "game," such as the game of life, the game of capitalism, the game of courtship and romantic love, and the game of war.

From this list we can immediately state some generalizations that are not true about all games. Not all games are frivolous in purpose; some, such as war games, are serious in purpose. Even games that are superficially frivolous in purpose can be games where you're competing for your own life, as shown by the example of Roman gladiatorial combat. Non-lethal games can involve considerable stakes of money and glory, as exemplified in professional poker and in the Olympic Games.

Roman gladiatorial combat was a game played to entertain people. In that sense it was frivolous in purpose. But, it was gruesome, violent, lethal, and expensive, so presumably there was some significant reason people went to the trouble and difficulty of putting on the games.

One hypothesis I've heard is the following. Rome contained a large class of poor people who lived on welfare and therefore were not occupied with useful work, and it was found to be necessary to entertain them to prevent them from engaging in crime and disruption. If this was the primary purpose of the games for some of the people who funded them, then certainly there was nothing frivolous about the games for those funders. For the people watching the games, the main purpose seems to have been entertainment.

Another hypothesis one can put forth is that the gladiatorial games embodied the Roman values of violence, domination, and heroism, and like most civilizations the Romans felt it was a worthwhile effort to put on events which could stand as monuments to their values. If we think of this as the primary purpose of the games, then one's inclined to say that the purpose is not frivolous, either for the funders or for the audience members.

If you think of the funders and the watchers of the Roman gladiatorial games as different sets of players in the game (expanding the conceptual boundaries of the game beyond the combat ring itself), one can venture that for the funders, the purpose of the games was often not frivolous, whereas for the watchers, the purpose of the games was most often the frivolous purpose of entertainment.

TODO: Clarify epistemic status of above example

This example illustrates the principle that a game can have multiple purposes, some explicit and some implicit, and different players in a game can have different purposes. The explicit purpose(s) of a game, being explicit, are typically apparent to all. In contrast, probably in almost all cases it's unclear to all or almost all observers of a game what all of the implicit purposes of the game are. This is because implicit purposes are, by definition, not stated, and since we can't read each other's thoughts we have no reliable way of knowing each other's unstated motivations.

Furthermore, people can be unaware of their own motivations. it seems to be the case that most of people's mental activity is unconscious, i.e. not witnessed or observed by their conscious minds, and many psychologists espouse that among people's motivations for things they do, there are their unconscious motivations. Some argue that most or all things we do are influenced at least in part, or even mostly, by unconscious motivations. This is not a psychology text, and we won't try to answer the question of in what ways and to what extent people's behavior is influenced by unconscious motivations. However, if indeed unconscious motivations exist, then we can say that a game may have an implicit purpose of which no observers have any awareness.

Given our limited access to our own minds, and our near lack of access to others' minds, it's clear why probably in almost all cases it's unclear to all or almost all observers of a game what all of the implicit purposes of the game are.

Let's now switch gears and poke at one of the more dubious examples we gave of a game, to see what we can learn about games in the process.

TODO: Explain prisoner's dilemma and address whether it's a game

Let's now switch gears again. Let's give some examples of things that are not games, which fail to be games in interesting ways that might tell us something about games.

Here's an example of a non-game: making toast. If you are a native English speaker: does it sound natural to describe making toast as a game? For me, the answer is that it does not sound natural. Making toast is not a game. It's some other kind of activity. Food preparation.

Here are some more examples of activities that are not usually called games: fixing your toaster; driving to work; working; sleeping; having sex; thinking; conversation; serving on a jury in a court of law; voting. People don't usually call any of these things games, and yet many of them have certain similarities to games. Serving on a jury and voting both have game-like qualities, being group activities governed by socially agreed upon systems of rules within which people make decisions in order to fulfill the objective of the activity (making a fair decision on the case being presented, or electing representatives and resolving plebiscites, respectively). Conversation, and language use in general, have many game-like qualities, being subject to many elaborate, unspoken rules. Game-like activities can be found strewn throughout life if you look for them.

We have collected some examples and non-examples of games, and we have a substantial middle ground of things that arguably have both gamelike and non-gamelike qualities, including voting, serving on a jury, and, usually, working. Let's use this data to evaluate some possible generalizations about games.

**Do games always have rules?** Can we think of an example of a game that has no rules? Conversation, one might argue, is a game with no rules. In some sense this is true; people are free to say whatever they want. However, conversation does have many unstated norms that are usually not violated.

TODO: Below is sloppy, make better

One of the norms that most conversations can (at least in my experience) be observed to follow is that when talking about a subject, one should not make a statement on a new subject until nobody still has a statement to make on the current subject, unless an interruption from the environment requires a change of subject. In the case of an interruption from the environment, the norm usually followed in the conversations I observe is to return to the same point in the suspended conversation where the interruption occurred, once the interruption has been dealt with.

Besides such conversational norms of speaking priority, which are I'm sure not universal to all conversations, each conversation will invariably follow many rules of grammar and prononunciation particular to the language(s) being used in the conversation. These are further examples of rules that conversations follow. Therefore we can say that conversations have rules. Therefore we can say the game of conversation is not a counterexample to the claim that games always have rules.

Other counterexamples I'm aware of can be disposed of in similar ways. It looks to me like any appearance of a gamelike activity lacking rules is due to failure to look sufficiently broadly for rules governing the activity. In interpreting this statement, it should be understood that rules need not be inviolable to be rules.

When speaking English, people usually follow rules of grammar. Sometimes people violate the rules of grammar they normally follow. Folk vernaculars of English can have their own grammars different from standard English grammar, but in most cases those grammars have their own internal consistencies. [TODO: Citation needed] In addition, there is more than one standard English, as there is standard British English, standard American English, and so forth. This illustrates that there is a great deal of complexity and inconsistency when it comes to rules of English grammar. We can still say as a generalization that English speakers, and speakers of every other language, follow the rules of grammar particular to their dialects most of the time when speaking. This illustrates the nuance that can apply when discussing the rules of games. Rules of games can be very flexible and granular in scope.

So far as our discussion has led us to be able to see, the generalization is true that **games and gamelike activities follow rules**. If there are exceptions to this generalization, they seem to be obscure.

The nature of rules is well worth exploring in more depth. However, in order to complete our discussion of games, so that we can move on to discuss our primary topic of winning, we will delay discussing the nature of rules in more depth.

**Are games always competitive?** The answer appears to be **no**. For some childrens' games, such as [peekaboo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peekaboo) and and [ring around the rosie](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ring_a_Ring_o'_Roses), it's difficult to see any sense in which they are competitive. However, most games are competitive in some sense. Even solitary games usually involve self-competition, trying to learn and do better.

**Are games always cooperative?** Any game which involves multiple people is cooperative in the sense that playing a game requires the players to agree to play the game (as opposed to doing anything else), to put effort towards its execution, and to abide by the rules of the game. Therefore we can conclude that multi-player games are always cooperative on some level, and usually competitive on another level. Jordan Peterson made this point in one of his lectures for his course Maps of Meaning, available on YouTube (sorry I can't provide a more specific citation). He gave an example much like what follows. In a game of hockey, the members of each team cooperate with each other in their competition with the other team. In addition, the members of each team compete with their team mebers for position in the meritocracy of the team. Finally, all the players cooperate with each other in their agreement to play the game and in their execution of gameplay according to the rules. There are a number of different levels of cooperation and competition in this case.

In solitary games the obvious comment would be that there is no cooperation because cooperation requires multiple people. This is true in an obvious sense. However, it's also false in a less obvious sense, in that playing a game requires internal coordination on the part of a person. In order to play a game, a person has to coordinate the different parts of their mind and body to focus them towards a single task. In the same sense, every activity whatsoever done by a person involves self-cooperation. One could fairly object that self-cooperation is an undue extension of the term "cooperation," and I will not press the point.

What conclusion are we led to about whether games are always cooperative? In this case we're led to **no single conclusion**. What we've said indicates that if self-cooperation is a form of cooperation, then games are always cooperative, and on the other hand, if self-cooperation is not a form of cooperation, then games are not always cooperative. In addition, what we've said indicates that multi-player games are always cooperative.

What can we say overall about the meaning of the word "game?" On this, let's quote from Wittgenstein, in the Philosophical Investigations, part I, remarks 66-67:

"66. Consider for example the proceedings that we call "games". I mean board-games, card-games, ball-games, Olympic games, and so on. What is common to them all?—Don't say: "There must be something common, or they would not be called 'games' "—but look and see whether there is anything common to all.—For if you look at them you will not see something that is common to all, but similarities, relationships, and a whole series of them at that. To repeat: don't think, but look!—Look for example at board-games, with their multifarious relationships. Now pass to card-games; here you find many correspondences with the first group, but many common features drop out, and others appear. When we pass next to ballgames, much that is common is retained, but much is lost.—Are they all 'amusing'? Compare chess with noughts and crosses. Or is there always winning and losing, or competition between players? Think of patience. In ball games there is winning and losing; but when a child throws his ball at the wall and catches it again, this feature has disappeared. Look at the parts played by skill and luck; and at the difference between skill in chess and skill in tennis. Think now of games like ring-a-ring-a-roses; here is the element of amusement, but how many other characteristic features have disappeared! And we can go through the many, many other groups of games in the same way; can see how similarities crop up and disappear.

"And the result of this examination is: we see a complicated network of similarities overlapping and criss-crossing: sometimes overall similarities, sometimes similarities of detail."

"67. I can think of no better expression to characterize these similarities than "family resemblances"; for the various resemblances between members of a family: build, features, colour of eyes, gait, temperament, etc. etc. overlap and criss-cross in the same way.—And I shall say: **'games' form a family**." [emphasis added]

### Rules and laws

We have agreed that games always have rules. However, we have not discussed at any length what rules are. Understanding rules is quite central to understanding games, and to understanding the principles of winning arguments. To understand rules, it is also helpful to compare the meaning of the word "rule" with the meaning of the word "law." Since the terms are close in meaning, comparing and contrasting the meanings of the terms is informative about both. Therefore we will embark on a unified analysis of rules and laws.

There are many different laws and sets of laws of varying kinds, degrees, and scopes of importance and validity. Examples of laws (or at any rate things that people call laws) include: religious systems of law such as [sharia law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sharia), the [Ten Commandments](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ten_Commandments) and [Talmudic law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orthodox_Judaism); the [laws and regulations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Primary_and_secondary_legislation) of each [state](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_(polity)), [region](administrative division), [municipality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Municipality), and so forth; the laws of [physics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Physics), [chemistry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chemistry), [biology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biology), [statistics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistics), [logic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logic), and [mathematics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mathematics), and other fields of study which have produced laws; [Murphy's law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murphy's_law); [Duverger's law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duverger's_law); mathematical theorems of sociological significance such as [Arrow's impossibility theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arrow's_impossibility_theorem) and the [Kakutani fixed point theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kakutani_fixed-point_theorem); traffic laws; the [law of attraction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_attraction_(New_Thought)); the [Law of One](http://www.lawofone.info/synopsis.php); and so forth. 

[Examples of rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule) (or at any rate things that people call rules) include, firstly, the rules of any game. Secondly, there are many rules (or things that people call rules) which are not literally rules of any game, such as: the [M'Naghten rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M'Naghten_rules); the [right-hand rule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Right-hand_rule); the [five-second rule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Five-second_rule) and other [rules of thumb](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_thumb); [unspoken rules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unspoken_rule); [rules of etiquette](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Etiquette); and rules of inference in logic (which we shall discuss at length later).

I am not aware of any counterexamples to the following generalization: all rules are defined and established by humans. Many laws, also, are clearly defined and established by humans, such as the laws of the legal systems of states, regions, and municipalities. Other laws, arguably, are not defined and established by humans. Though descriptions of physical theories such as Newtonian physics are clearly products of humans, some would argue that Newtonian physics (or some hypothetical complete physical theory) is a description of laws of nature that exist objectively, independently of humans, regardless of whether we know about them. If laws of nature exist objectively, then there are laws that weren't created by humans. Some would argue that systems of religious law, such as sharia law or the Ten Commandments, were created by God and therefore not created by humans. In summary, some but arguably not all laws are created by humans, whereas essentially all things people call rules are created by humans, so far as the author knows.

There is some overlap between the categories of rules and laws. For example, the following statement seems fair: the laws of Newtonian physics are rules describing the motion of physical bodies. From that statement it follows that the laws of Newtonian physics are both rules and laws. If we accept that there are many (or in fact any) things which we can reasonably call either rules or laws, then it follows that there are no properties which all rules have and all laws lack, or vice versa.

Is every rule a law? Is every law a rule? "The laws of chess" and "the rules of biology" are odd sounding phrases, probably, to most native English speakers. "The laws of chess" sounds odd, perhaps, because it suggests that the rules of chess have some quality of inevitability, whereas in fact people regularly play [variants](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chess960) [of](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-dimensional_chess) [chess](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_chess_variants), cheat at chess, misunderstand the rules of chess, etc. "The rules of biology" sounds odd, perhaps, because it suggests the connotation of rules that biological organisms must obey, as opposed to laws that their parts do obey. These phrases, "the laws of chess" and "the rules of biology," are still probably understandable in context, and they need not have the illogical connations we have described for them, but they can refer simply to the rules of chess and the laws of biology.

Our linguistic thought experiments suggest, firstly, that there is a delicate difference in meaning between "rule" and "law," and secondly, that there is a great deal of similarity in meaning between "rule" and "law."

The similarity in meaning between "rule" and "law" is so great that one hypothesis one might venture is that "rule" and "law" are essentially different words for the same concept, which we apply habitually to different kinds of things, without any deeper distinction. One way of describing the hypothesized vague, habitual distinction is to observe that laws are usually broad in their domain of applicability, whereas rules are usually narrow in their domain of applicability.

One objection to the view that "rule" and "law" are essentially the same concept is as follows. All things we habitually call rules seem to be made by humans. A qualifier to this is that rules can also be made by the creations of humans, as when computer programs generate rules for other programs to follow. Rules govern humans and the operations of the creations of humans. Laws, on the other hand, according to the objection, are not always created by humans, and sometimes they govern nature rather than humans or the creations of humans. If one accepts the foregoing, then one will acknowledge a substantive distinction between rules and laws.

For the sake of clear nomenclature, we will use the term "natural law" to refer to laws which are not created by humans. By definition, then, natural laws include any laws created by God, if God exists. I am not assuming that any natural laws exist, but we have a word for any that do exist (as well as any that don't exist).

The nature and extent of the difference in meaning between "rule" and "law" is, at the end of the day, a question of opinion. The subtleties of the distinction are interesting. What's perhaps more interesting, though, is looking deeper into the basic meanings of the terms "rule" and "law." Let's see if we can look into the heart of the term "rule" to see what we find, and then let's see if we can find something different in the heart of the term "law."

It would be helpful to establish more relations between "rule" and other terms we have studied. We have generalized that games and gamelike activities follow rules. Can we also generalize that rules occur in the context of games and gamelike activities?

Let's look back to the examples of rules we gave. Do all of them occur in the context of games or gamelike activities? Let's examine. The M'Naghten rules are rules for legal proceedings, which are a gamelike activity used to settle legal cases. The right-hand rule is a mini-game for remembering orientation conventions in 3D vector math. The five-second rule is a mini-game (lacking any factual basis) which we play to justify eating food off the floor. The [rule of 72](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rule_of_72) is a rule of thumb that one can employ in the gamelike activity of investment portfolio construction. One illustration that investment portfolio construction is a gamelike activity is that [a number of games](https://www.google.com/?q=stock+market+simulator) have been closely modeled after the activity of trading the stock market. Trading the stock market has, in turn, drawn comparison to gambling games such as poker.

Bearing in mind the flexibility of the concept "game or gamelike activity," it seems fair to generalize that rules occur in the context of games or gamelike activities. This generalization gives us further conceptual bearing for thinking about rules: we can always think about rules in the context of games or gamelike activities.

This generalization is violated by the statement "the laws of Newtonian physics are rules governing the motion of physical bodies," if we consider the laws of Newtonian physics to be objective features of nature rather than a human-constructed system for understanding nature. In other words, at least one of these four things is false:

1. Rules always occur in the context of games or gamelike activities.
2. The laws of Newtonian physics are objective features of nature rather than a human-constructed system for understanding nature.
3. The laws of Newtonian physics are rules.
4. Nature itself is not a gamelike activity.

If statements 1-3 are true, then we can conclude that nature itself is a gamelike activity, since if the laws of Newtonian physics are objective features of nature, then the context to which they apply is nature itself. If the laws of Newtonian physics are rules, then it follows that nature itself is a gamelike activity, in direct contradiction of statement 4. Hence, we are required by logic to reject at least one of statements 1-4.

All of these statements can be thought of as terminological rules. Statement 1 says that if we're willing to call something a rule, we should be willing to call its context a game or gamelike activity. Statement 3 says we should be willing to refer to the laws of Newtonian physics as rules. Statement 4 says we should not be willing to describe nature itself as a gamelike activity.

Statement 2 is subtler. It may seem to be inescapably a statement about the world because the statement means that there are laws which are features of the real world which correlate in some way to the human-constructed descriptions of the theory of Newtonian physics. In this interpretation, statement 2 is clearly about the world. However, statement 2 can be better interpreted as implicitly combining this assertion about the world with a second terminological assertion. Statement 2 says, not only are there objective laws of nature correlating to human-constructed descriptions of Newtonian physics, but furthermore, we should use the phrase "the laws of Newtonian physics" to refer to said laws of nature, as opposed to using the phrase "the laws of Newtonian physics" to refer to said human-constructed descriptions. Therefore statement 2 is a combination of a statement about the world with a terminological assertion. Let us refer to these two parts of statement 2 as statement 2w and statement 2t, respectively.

**Statement 2w:** There are objective laws of nature correlating to human-constructed descriptions of Newtonian physics.

**Statement 2t:** We should use the phrase "the laws of Newtonian physics" to refer to said laws of nature, as opposed to using the phrase "the laws of Newtonian physics" to refer to said human-constructed descriptions.

Evidently, for statement 2t to make sense, statement 2w must be true. However, one can accept statement 2w and reject statement 2t. If one neither accepts nor rejects statement 2w, if one maintains that one does not know whether or statement 2w is true, one can still reject statement 2t.

My view is that I can't accept or reject statement 2w because I don't have the knowledge to say whether it's true or false. That sharpens our constraint to the following. We must reject at least one of four terminological rules: statements 1, 2t, 3, and 4.

This example illustrates that logic, the need for logical consistency, is one constraint on how we use language. Most of us are not willing to use language in logically inconsistent ways, in part because it will usually result in our views appearing unconvincing to others, and perhaps in us being looked upon as stupid or crazy. People can use language however they want; people are free to follow and to break any of the terminological rules on the table, in any combination. However, if logical consistency is important to us, there are certain sets of terminological rules we cannot adopt: for example, we cannot adopt all of statements 1, 2t, 3, and 4. The foregoing is a *reductio ad absurdum* argument against the conjunction of statements 1-4.

I would prefer not to reject statement 1, "rules always occur in the context of games or gamelike activities," because it's a generalization we've established with some justification. I would prefer not to need to reject statement 3, because it seems like a natural enough statement to me. I would prefer not to need to reject statement 4, because nature itself, while it is undoubtedly gamelike in many respects, is quite different from typical examples of games. That leaves statement 2t. I have no allegiance to statement 2t, because I don't think we have evidence for statement 2w. Indeed, anybody who does not accept statement 2w won't accept statement 2t either. This makes statement 2t seem like the most likely candidate for rejection.

Let's examine further. Why shouldn't we accept statement 2w? Why don't we have the knowledge to say that it's true?

For starters, Newtonian physics is known to be correct only in restricted contexts and to a certain degree of approximation. Newtonian physics was formulated by inductive generalization from a certain body of phenomena, namely the motions of objects that can be seen with the naked eye. When it comes to very small objects, very large scale phenomena, very high speeds, very high energy levels, etc., Newtonian physics ceases to be correct and other theories, like quantum physics and general relativity, are required to get the right answers. Quantum physics and general relativity, in turn, have proven extremely difficult to unify into a single logically consistent theory. All of this suggests that Newtonian physics, as well as all existing theories, represent only our best current state of understanding. This casts doubt on the idea of assuming that the laws of Newtonian physics as described by physicists are direct correlates of objective laws of nature, rather than being human constructions that approximate the actual behavior of nature to a high degree of accuracy in a wide yet limited variety of cases.

Here is an additional reason to doubt statement 2w. As Kant has argued in the *Critique of Pure Reason*, we cannot have direct knowledge of the world outside ourselves. Our sense perceptions and experiences are constructions of our minds which are presumed to reflect an outside world through many layers of indirection, through processes such as light transmission, retinal stimulation, edge detection, object detection, associative cognition, etc. Our theories of the world are abstractions over our observations, i.e. generalizations over series of sense perceptions had by humans over time. Then can we, with intellectual fairness, assume that the outside world is made in the image of our models of the outside world?

In short, then, there are good reasons to doubt statement 2w, a statement to which we have had no prior commitment in this text. And if we don't accept statement 2w, then we can't accept statement 2t, because if statement 2w is not true then statement 2t is incoherent. Since we have to reject at least one of statements 1-4, and it seems clear that the case against rejecting statement 2t is least compelling, we will in this text reject the terminological rule statement 2t. In other words, we will not use the phrase "the laws of Newtonian physics" to refer to objective laws of nature correlating to the human-constructed descriptions of Newtonian physics. Instead, we will use the phrase "the laws of Newtonian physics" to refer to said human-constructed descriptions, or to the ideas those descriptions denote.

The same problem we have encountered with Newtonian physics occurs with other phrases that refer either to laws or nature or to human-constructed descriptions of supposed laws of nature. Examples of phrases presenting this problem include "the laws of general relativity," "the laws of quantum mechanics," "the laws of chemistry," "the laws of biology," etc. In all such cases, in this text we shall interpret the phrases as referring to human constructed descriptions of laws, and not to objective laws of nature. This is, as with the case of the laws of Newtonian physics, not an attempt to say that there aren't corresponding objective laws of nature (though many of the same difficulties with asserting positively the existence of such laws present themselves in other cases). It's simply a terminological choice driven by the desire not to take a position on what objective laws of nature exist.

### Winning

Let's return to our original question in this section. What is winning? At the start of the section we asked whether winning always happens to people in the context of some game. If true, this would be an interesting generalization that would let us apply the philosophy of games to understanding winning.

What seems to be the case is that **winning always occurs in the context of some game or gamelike activity**. "Game or gamelike activity" is, as we have seen, a very broad category, taking in things as disparate as soccer, capitalism, and life. For that reason, it's not a very strong claim to say that winning always occurs in the context of some game or gamelike activity. We'll assume this generalization going forward.

What is winning? Winning is some kind of condition which a player of a game, or a participant of a gamelike activity, can obtain or be in. Typically it's a condition defined by the rules of the game or activity. In typical cases, the conditions for winning are defined by the (explicit) rules of the game, and there is rarely question about whether and when somebody has won the game. However, these generalizations belie some complexities.

Consider, again, winning at life. Whether somebody is winning at life can only be said relative to some frame of evaluation.

For example, consider a person who amassed great wealth through ethically dubious yet legal means. From a straightforwardly capitalist point of view, we might say they were winning at life, because they are amassing wealth in the free market. From a Christian pont of view, we would probably say they were not winning at life. The Christian judgment can be based on the belief that life is a game where the object is to seek the way of Christ, which the wealthy person in our example is not doing. These two frames of evaluation, capitalism and Christianity, provide two very different perspectives on whether the person of the example is winning at life.

Consider, as a further example, somebody who lived an impoverised life in a rural region of the world where they farmed, gained religious education, gained training as a warrior, and died young in combat. From one frame of evaluation, we might say this person had an underprivileged and ultimately oppressed life where their future as an individual was subjugated to the nonsensical needs of a national war machine. From another frame of evaluation, we might say that this person led a virtuous and spiritual life which culminated in the honor of dying in a fight for that which is sacred. Again, each of these narratives provides very different conclusions as to whether this person is winning at life.

For any life you can describe, you can imagine multiple frames of evaluation which provide different conclusions about whether the liver of that life was winning. This is to say that facts alone are not sufficient to determine a judgment of winning at life or not winning at life. One also needs some additional ingredient, what we are generically calling a frame of evaluation.

Winning at life, in this respect, is unlike winning at most games, in that fair observers will frequently disagree about whether somebody is winning at life, whereas for most games, fair observers will almost always agree about who the winner of the game is and whether there is a winner. This disanalogy is an interesting conceptual disconnect that seems worth working out, to see what can be learned.

The disanalogy also reminds us of a question we asked a ways back and still haven't answered: is (human) life a game? To illustrate the silliness of this particular question, let's ask a more basic question: is human life a gamelike activity? To ask this is to ask whether human life is like games, especially typical games. The answer to this is that life is like them in some ways (e.g., you have to follow rules), and unlike them in other ways (e.g., most games don't inevitably end in death, whereas all lives do). Life is therefore both gamelike and non-gamelike, and it's arguably or partially correct and arguably or partially incorrect, and correct in inexhaustibly many possible ways in inexhaustibly many instances, and incorrect in inexhaustibly many other possible ways in inexhaustibly many other instances, to call life a game and to call it not a game. As a shorter way of saying this, we will say, life is and is not a game.

TODO: In above paragraph... a difference between games and life is that life ends in the end of life and games end in the end of games? Can we name a difference between life and games?

If life is and is not a game, then you might expect that winning at life both is and is not possible, in different senses. We have already seen this to be the case. Winning at life is not possible in the sense that there is no objective, agreed upon standard by which to judge whether somebody won at life. Winning at life is possible in the sense that there are inexhaustibly many frames of evaluation from which one can apply the judgment that a certain course of action did lead to or is likely to lead to winning at life.

Of course, the most practical case is the case where one adopts a certain frame of evaluation as a frame of evaluation one routinely applies to one's own life, and then one proceeds to attempt to win at life according to the standards of that frame of evaluation. Almost everybody does this to some extent.

People apply many different frames of evaluation to many different parts of their lives as their lives go on. These frames of evaluation generally evolve over time. Conflicts often exist, where different frames of evaluation applied simultaneously or at different times yield conflicting conclusions. This can lead to regret about past decisions, a sense of turmoil and inner conflict in one's present, etc.

If one wants to do something resembling winning at life, then it's clearly necessary to unify multiple conflicting frames of evaluation that one applies to one's life into a single frame of evaluation, which can and should evolve over time. The reason this is necessary is that without a unified frame of evaluation to judge success and therefore guide decision making, one's decisions won't move one's life in a consistent direction, and rather than reaping the rewards that come from pursuing a well strategized life, one may instead drift about without ever finding lasting success. This does not argue against drifting about for a time in life; this can be helpful for learning, self discovery, and so forth. It just argues that if one's interested in something resembling winning at life, then one should be interested in the pursuit of coherence in and the working out of contradictions between the frames of evaluation that one applies to one's life and one's choices, and in the eventual development of a philosophy and direction in life if one lacks those things in good measure.

We have analyzed the concept of winning at life at some length. Let's now turn back to the general concept of winning. To understand winning better, it would be interesting to have a theory of winning which might explain some of the confusing observations we've made, such as that there are so many different, incompatible frames of evaluation with which to judge winning and losing at life.

Our theory of winning is as follows: **to win is to achieve a purpose one has in a game or gamelike activity**.

Typically, when one is explicitly declared the winner of a game, this means that one has won according to the rules of the game, or in other words that one has achieved the explicit purpose stated in the rules of the game. We'll call this **explicit winning**.

When one achieves an implicit purpose one has in playing a game, this typically carries the feeling of victory, but if the purpose is implicit then the celebration will typically also be implicit, meaning in this case internal. We'll call achieving an implicit purpose in a game **implicit winning**.

In most cases, when we talk about winning, we're talking about explicit winning. However, it certainly seems that success in life is not predicated on others' awareness of one's intentions, so that it seems unreasonable to discount implicit winning as a form of winning.

We can think of many examples of implicit winning. One is playing chess with a potential romantic interest and accomplishing the implicit purpose of having meaningful and pleasant social interaction with them, perhaps in addition to the explicit purpose of winning the game. Another example of implicit winning is taking care of some financial chores and accomplishing the implicit purpose of increasing one's sense of financial confidence, in addition to the explicit purpose of refinancing one's debt or whatever it was. Another example of implicit winning is finishing a job at work and doing it well, accomplishing the implicit purpose of giving one's life purpose and giving oneself a reason for self-pride in a job well done, as well as the explicit purpose of fulfilling one's work obligations.

Now let's pick at our theory and see how it does and what it says in various circumstances. TODO

### Winning arguments and winning debates

Having analyzed the concept of winning, we can now shed more light on the concepts of winning arguments and winning debates. We are back where we were at the start of the Introduction, at our attempt to explain the meaning of the title, Winning Arguments.

In the first three paragraphs of the Introduction, we distinguished between two senses of "winning arguments," corresponding to two senses of "argument," i.e. "argument" in the sense of "debate," and "argument" in the sense of "a series of statements designed to provide reasons to believe some conclusion(s)." We refer to the former as debates and the latter as arguments.

Thus, we have two concepts stated by the title, both of which we need to analyze: the concept of winning arguments, and the concept of winning debates. "A winning argument," we presumed, means essentially "a persuasive argument;" but a deeper conceptual analysis of the phrase remains to be done. "Winning debates" refers to the activity of winning in debates.

Let's start by digging deeper into the concept of winning debates. The phrase "winning debates" presupposes that debates are a kind of game or gamelike activity. Are they? Well, are debates like games? Let's ask some more questions that shed light on that.

Are debates competitive? Recall we defined a "debate" as "an exchange of communication where participants discuss with each other the merits and demerits of some claims that they are mutually interested in and believe themselves to disagree about." Typically debates are competitive, as participants compete to persuade other participants of their point of view.

Are debates cooperative? Yes, in the sense that to engage in a coherent debate, participants need to understand each others' statements and respond with relevant, appropriate statements.

Do debates follow rules? TODO

## Statements

## Reasons

## Truth

## Belief

## Persuasion
